---
title: An Automated Multi-Layered Methodology to Assist the Secure and Risk-Aware Design of Multi-Factor Authentication Protocols
paper: TDSC2022

people:
    - MarcoPernpruner
    - RobertoCarbone
    - GiadaSciarretta
    - SilvioRanise

---

{% include toc.md %}

## Threat Model
Considering Table 3, which displays the threat model that we have identified for our analyses, we now show the relationship between the <i>Authentication Threats</i> identified by NIST and our threat model.

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Authentication Threat in NIST SP 800-63B</th>
      <th>Attacker in our threat model</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Assertion Manufacture or Modification</td>
      <td>Not considered, since the authentication assertion is digitally signed by the IdPServer and cannot be tampered with.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Theft</td>
      <td>Considered in PCT, MDT and CT.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Duplication</td>
      <td>Considered in D, though eID cards cannot be duplicated due to EA3.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Eavesdropping</td>
      <td>Considered in ES.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Offline Cracking</td>
      <td>Not considered, due to the restricted number of possible attempts while inserting the eID card's <tt>PIN</tt>.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Side Channel Attack</td>
      <td>Not considered, as the eID card's private key cannot be extracted (due to EA4).</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Phishing</td>
      <td>Considered in SE, MB and MM.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Social Engineering</td>
      <td>Considered in SE.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Online Guessing</td>
      <td>Not considered, due to the restricted number of possible attempts while inserting the eID card's <tt>PIN</tt> and the OTP.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Endpoint Compromise</td>
      <td>Considered in MB and MM.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Unauthorized Binding</td>
      <td>Not considered, as eID cards can be associated only to their legitimate owners (due to EA1).</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## Symbolic Analysis
The symbolic layer of our methodology requires to model protocols through the specification language **ASLan++**, a high-level language that formalizes the interactions between the different protocol roles. These models have then been given in input to **SATMC** (SAT-based Model Checker), an open and flexible platform for model-checking security protocols via reduction to SAT.

SATMC takes as input a security protocol and can determine whether the concurrent execution of a finite number of sessions of the specified protocol satisfies the expected security properties inspite of the interference of a malicious intruder. The verification of the security properties is performed interfacing with state-of-the-art SAT solvers (MiniSat and zChaff are currently supported) and is based on the use of LTL logic.

For our analyses, we used SATMC (Version 3.5.7) launched within Eclipse using the STIATE Plugin (Version 1.0.0.1). 

ASLan++ file and analyses outputs are available [**here**](https://github.com/stfbk/TDSC2022_SymbolicAnalysis).

SATMC + STIATE Plugin + instructions to add STIATE Plugin in Eclipse are available [**here**](https://drive.google.com/a/fbk.eu/file/d/1Qc5T_VxXYPLh6i4IbEmuZlh_vM5cKu3_/view?usp=sharing).

The AVANTSSAR deliverable D2.3 "ASLan++ specification and tutorial" is available [**here**](https://drive.google.com/a/fbk.eu/file/d/1TsPxkw09ziDaY21ytgIZyg7m9I9lpBMb/view?usp=sharing).

### Significant ASLan++ predicates
To better understand the formalisations, it is worth describing some predicates provided by ASLan++:
<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Predicate</th>
      <th>Description</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td><tt>weakly_authentic(ch)</tt></td>
      <td>A channel <tt>ch</tt> is <i>weakly authentic</i> if its input can be accessed by a single, but unknown, sender.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><tt>authentic_on(ch, S)</tt></td>
      <td>A channel <tt>ch</tt> is <i>authentic</i> if its input can be accessed only by the specified sender <tt>S</tt>. Therefore, this predicate is a strengthened version of <i>weakly authentic</i>.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><tt>weakly_confidential(ch)</tt></td>
      <td>A channel <tt>ch</tt> is <i>weakly confidential</i> if its output can be accessed by a single, but unknown, recipient.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><tt>confidential_to(ch, R)</tt></td>
      <td>A channel <tt>ch</tt> is <i>confidential</i> if its output can be accessed only by the specified recipient <tt>R</tt>. Therefore, this predicate is a strengthened version of <i>weakly confidential</i>.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><tt>link(ch_A2B, ch_B2A)</tt></td>
      <td>Two channels <tt>ch_A2B</tt> and <tt>ch_B2A</tt> are <i>linked</i> if the agent sending messages over the former is the same receiving messages on the latter.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><tt>unilateral_conf_auth(ch_A2B, ch_B2A, B)</tt></td>
      <td>
        The property of <i>unilateral confidentiality and authenticity</i> can be used to model a run of SSL/TLS in which an agent has a valid certificate, while the other has not. Specifically, this property implies that:
        <ul>
          <li><tt>ch_A2B</tt> is <i>confidential</i> to <tt>B</tt> and <i>weakly authentic</i>;</li>
          <li><tt>ch_B2A</tt> is <i>weakly confidential</i> and <i>authentic</i> for <tt>B</tt>;</li>
          <li><tt>ch_A2B</tt> and <tt>ch_B2A</tt> are <i>linked</i>.</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><tt>unilateral_conf_auth(ch_A2B, ch_B2A, A, B)</tt></td>
      <td>
        The property of <i>bilateral confidentiality and authenticity</i>  can be used to model a run of SSL/TLS in which both agents have a valid certificate. Specifically, this property implies that:
        <ul>
          <li><tt>ch_A2B</tt> is <i>confidential</i> to <tt>B</tt> and <i>authentic</i> for <tt>A</tt>;</li>
          <li><tt>ch_B2A</tt> is <i>confidential</i> to <tt>A</tt> and <i>authentic</i> for <tt>B</tt>;</li>
          <li><tt>ch_A2B</tt> and <tt>ch_B2A</tt> are <i>linked</i>.</li>
        </ul>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

### Approximations
When formally modelling the use case scenario, we have adopted the following approximations:

<table id="table-risk-analysis-factors">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th width="50%">In the real protocol...</th>
      <th width="50%">In the formal model...</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>The IdPServer sends a webpage to the browser (steps 6, 24b).</td>
      <td>The IdPServer sends itself (the entity <tt>IdPServer</tt>) to the browser.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>The browser displays a webpage to the user (steps 7, 24c).</td>
      <td>The browser sends itself (the entity <tt>Browser</tt>) to the user.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>The user inserts her <tt>userId</tt> in the browser (step 8).</td>
      <td>The user sends herself (the entity <tt>User</tt>) to the browser.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>The eICApp displays an activity to the user (steps 14, 24a).</td>
      <td>The eICApp sends itself (the entity <tt>EICApp</tt>) to the user.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>The user reads the QR code through the eICApp (step 12), which extracts the parameters and uses them to generate the challenge (13).</td>
      <td>The user sends to the eICApp the parameters to generate the challenge.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>The user places the eID card near the mobile device in order to make them interact through NFC.</td>
      <td>The user sends a specific string (<tt>useEIC</tt>) to the eID card.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>The interaction between the eICApp the the eID cards occurs in 4 steps: the former sends the PIN (step 17), the latter sends a feedback on its correctness (step 18), the former sends the challenge (step 19) and the latter sends both its certificate and the response (step 20).</td>
      <td>The PIN and the challenge are sent at the same time; the eID card provides the response only if the PIN is correct.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>In addition to the challenge, the eICApp sends the eID card's certificate to the IdPServer (step 21).</td>
      <td>Public keys are supposed to be known, so there is no need to send the eID card's certificate.</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## Risk Analysis
During the risk analysis, we have considered the following factors:
<table id="table-risk-analysis-factors">
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th colspan="3"><b>Likelihood</b></th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Technical Difficulty</td>
        <td class="text-center">TD</td>
        <td>Deals with the technical difficulty to perform the attack from a technical perspective, with lower scores representing higher levels of difficulty. For instance, reading a password from a screen is not technically difficult (higher value), in contrast to programming a rooting malware (lower value).</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Opportunity</td>
        <td class="text-center">O</td>
        <td>Time or space restrictions limiting the attackers' opportunity to carry the attack out, with more restrictions resulting in lower scores. For instance, assuming that mobile devices are protected by security mechanisms, thieves need to steal them when they are unlocked, otherwise they become unusable (lower value). On the other hand, deceiving users into revealing their password is not subject to particular limitations (higher value).</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Attack Vector</td>
        <td class="text-center">AV</td>
        <td>The vector which the attack is carried out through. Attacks requiring a physical intervention result in a rating of 1, while those requiring only a network access result in 7.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>User Interaction needed</td>
        <td class="text-center">UI</td>
        <td>Whether the victims need to interact in order to make the attack successful, with lower scores (1 or 2) assigned when an interaction is needed in a specific interval of time, 4 when an interaction is needed with no time constraints, 7 when the attack can be carried out without any interaction with the users. For instance, in case the victim needs to authorize the attacker's malicious attempt in a few minutes (before the operation expires), this results in a lower score.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Spread of Attack</td>
        <td class="text-center">SA</td>
        <td>Provides a measure of the popularity of an attack, based on official statistics concerning the specific (combination of) attackers analysed. Common attacks result in higher scores.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th colspan="3"><b>Impact</b></th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Loss of Security Properties</td>
        <td class="text-center">LSP</td>
        <td>Refers to the effects of the attack in terms of violated security properties. While OWASP suggests four different factors to estimate the loss of confidentiality, integrity, availability and accountability respectively, we chose to consider them jointly. As our protocols aim at authenticating users onto an external SP, we are not aware of the impact of a potential violation on the security properties, therefore we adopt a worst-case approach and always rate this factor with 9.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Attack Scale</td>
        <td class="text-center">AS</td>
        <td>Depends on the number of users which could potentially be compromised, with more users leading to higher values. In particular, we assign 2 when only a specific target can be threaten, while we use 8 when everyone can be affected.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Attack Detection</td>
        <td class="text-center">AD</td>
        <td>Whether (and how easily) the attack can be detected by the victims after it has been successfully carried out, with easy-to-detect attacks resulting in lower scores. For instance, if every successful authentication cause a notification to be sent to the legitimate user, a potential account violation will be discovered easily, thus resulting in lower scores.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Attack Persistence</td>
        <td class="text-center">AP</td>
        <td>Provides a measure of the time exposure of the user's account in case it was compromised. For instance, if an attacker manages to steal the OTP or the response connected with the ongoing attempt, he can compromise only that specific authentication; on the other hand, if he steals the eID card and its PIN he can authenticate on the user's behalf until the theft is reported and the eID card blocked. In the former case we rate this factor with 2, while in the latter with 8.</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

More details on the results of the analysis can be found below:
<table id="table-values-QR" class="text-center">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th rowspan="2" class="border-thick-right" width="15%">Attacker</th>
      <th colspan="7">Likelihood</th>
      <th colspan="6" class="border-thick-left">Impact</th>
      <th rowspan="2" class="border-thick-left">Risk</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th><span title="Technical Difficulty">TD</span></th>
      <th><span title="Opportunity">O</span></th>
      <th><span title="Attack Vector">AV</span></th>
      <th><span title="User Interaction">UI</span></th>
      <th><span title="Spread of Attack">SA</span></th>
      <th colspan="2">Overall</th>
      <th class="border-thick-left"><span title="Loss of Security Properties">LSP</span></th>
      <th><span title="Attack Scale">AS</span></th>
      <th><span title="Attack Detection">AD</span></th>
      <th><span title="Attack Persistence">AP</span></th>
      <th colspan="2">Overall</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td class="border-thick-left border-thick-right">MM</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>7</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>2.80</td>
      <td>Low</td>
      <td class="border-thick-left">9</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>5.50</td>
      <td>Medium</td>
      <td class="border-thick-left">Low</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="border-thick-left border-thick-right">CT+D</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>7</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>4.20</td>
      <td>Medium</td>
      <td class="border-thick-left">9</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>5.50</td>
      <td>Medium</td>
      <td class="border-thick-left">Medium</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="border-thick-left border-thick-right">CT+ES</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>0</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>2.40</td>
      <td>Low</td>
      <td class="border-thick-left">9</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>5.50</td>
      <td>Medium</td>
      <td class="border-thick-left">Low</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="border-thick-left border-thick-right">CT+SS</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>4.00</td>
      <td>Medium</td>
      <td class="border-thick-left">9</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>5.50</td>
      <td>Medium</td>
      <td class="border-thick-left">Medium</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="border-thick-left border-thick-right">CT+SE</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>2.80</td>
      <td>Low</td>
      <td class="border-thick-left">9</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>5.50</td>
      <td>Medium</td>
      <td class="border-thick-left">Low</td>
    </tr>
    <tr class="border-thick-top">
      <td class="border-thick-left border-thick-right">SE</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>9</td>
      <td>7</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>5.00</td>
      <td>Medium</td>
      <td class="border-thick-left">9</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>7</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>5.75</td>
      <td>Medium</td>
      <td class="border-thick-left">Medium</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td class="border-thick-left border-thick-right">MB</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>7</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>4.00</td>
      <td>Medium</td>
      <td class="border-thick-left">9</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>7</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>6.50</td>
      <td>High</td>
      <td class="border-thick-left">High</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## Mitigations
We now discuss the security mitigations that we have identified, along with their effects on security and usability.
<ul>
  <li><b>M1</b>: since rooted devices are known to be extremely vulnerable to common attacks, preventing the use of the eIDApp on such devices brings many advantages in terms of security. On the other hand, it may result in usability issues since people who rooted their devices on purpose would not manage to use the application.</li>

  <li><b>M2</b>: restricts the attack surface, as attackers cannot just send malicious QR codes to random people, but they need to choose a precise victim as the <tt>userId</tt> is part of the challenge. Although we do not require the <tt>userId</tt> to be a secret value (like a password), it should not be commonly known (like the name of the user) to reduce the possibility of a general attack. Given the additional value users have to insert, this mitigation slightly reduces usability.</li>

  <li><b>M3</b>: restricts the ability of attackers to deceive users by sending improper QR codes, since the operation must be completed within a certain time interval. This mitigation partially affects usability as well, considering that expired authentication attempts have to be launched again.</li>

  <li><b>M4</b>: by restricting the possible attempts, prevents guessing and brute-force attacks on secret values. The number of available attempt should be carefully set in order to find a trade-off between security and usability (i.e., neither too tight, nor too loose).</li>

  <li><b>M5</b>: restricts the possibility of an attack, since the attacker would also need to obtain the OTP associated with that specific authentication attempt. Specifically, we have decided to display the OTP on the mobile application in order to reduce phishing attacks carried out via email: in case users do not have an authentication attempt currently ongoing on the personal computer's browser, they would not know where to insert the OTP. Given the additional value users have to insert, this mitigation slightly reduces usability.</li>

  <li><b>M6</b>: reminds users of verifying that QR codes are displayed on an official website, thus reducing the likelihood of attackers sending improper QR codes on phishing websites (such as SE and MB). However, since the warning is always displayed within the mobile application, users could ignore or get used to it. This mitigation has no impact on usability, as it does not restrict users' attempt nor it requires users to perform additional operations.</li>

  <li><b>M7</b>: helps the user distinguish between legitimate and malicious authentication attempts. This mitigation is extremely effective in authorization contexts, as precise details about the ongoing operation to authorize are displayed to the user. When dealing with authentication, instead, it is difficult to find suitable details to uniquely identify the ongoing attempt, thus the security benefits are slightly lower. In general, the information displayed to the user should be relevant and uniquely identify the operation, otherwise some attacks could anyway be performed. The information can be shown either without affecting the procedure (e.g., in the same window where the user inserts the <tt>PIN</tt>) or by introducing an <i>ad hoc</i> activity, which would slightly affect usability. When rating usability in Table 10, we consider the former case.</li>
</ul>

<style>
  .rotate {
    -moz-transform: rotate(-90.0deg);
    -o-transform: rotate(-90.0deg);
    -webkit-transform: rotate(-90.0deg);
    filter: progid: DXImageTransform.Microsoft.BasicImage(rotation=0.083);
    -ms-filter: "progid:DXImageTransform.Microsoft.BasicImage(rotation=0.083)";
    transform: rotate(-90.0deg);
  }

  table {
    margin-bottom: 1em;
    border: 2px solid #dbdbdb !important;
  }

  table tr {
    border: 1px solid #dbdbdb !important;
  }

  table th {
    border-width: 2px 1px !important;
  }

  table td {
    border-width: 1px !important;
  }

  table th,
  table td {
    vertical-align: middle !important;
  }

  table th.text-center,
  table td.text-center {
    text-align: center !important;
  }

  table.text-center th,
  table.text-center td {
    text-align: center !important;
  }

  table .border-thick-left {
    border-left-width: 2px !important;
  }

  table .border-thick-right {
    border-right-width: 2px !important;
  }

  table .border-thick-top {
    border-top-width: 2px !important;
  }

  table .border-thick-bottom {
    border-bottom-width: 2px !important;
  }
</style>

<script>
  $("td[data-motivation]").each(function() {
    var motivation = $(this).data("motivation");

    $(this).addClass("tooltip");
    $(this).append("<span class=\"tooltip-text\">"+motivation+"</span>");
  });
</script>